If you pick up any of the standard textbooks
about robotics, you will find reference to
Denavit and Hartenberg notation. This is named
after Jacques Denavit and Richard Hartenberg
who in 1955 wrote an article and later, a
book which proposed a very, very general way
of describing serial link mechanisms and most
of the robots that we've looked at are serial
link manipulators. So, the Denavit and Hartenberg
notation is particularly applicable for this
class of mechanism.
Now in most of the standard textbooks. People
start off with introducing this particular
notation. Personally, I find the notation
somewhat complex and not particularly intuitive.
So, what I've done in this particular lecture
is left it until the end. A key aspect of
Denavit-Hartenberg notation is that each joint
in the robot is described simply by 4 parameters.
So, let's start off with a very simple serial
link manipulative that 2 joint robot that
we've seen a number of times before. Each
joint is attached via a link to the previous
joint. So here, we can see joint 1 which is
connected to link 1 which is connected to
joint 2 which is connected to link 2. Their
links are rigid but the joints can move. They
can be either rotational as an example shown
here or they can be prismatic or sliding joints
that we've talked about before.
Every joint connects to links and every link
connects to joints except for the first and
last link. The first link is the base of the
robot which does not move refer to that as
link 0 and the last link is the in-defector
or is attached to the in-defector of the robot.
If a robot has got n-joints then, it must
have n plus 1 links, that's including the
0th link or the base. Fundamental to the Denavit-Hartenberg
notation is we attach a coordinate frame to
the far end of every link of the robot. So
here, we can see link J shown in blue and
we attach the coordinate frame J to the far
end of link J that is the end of the link
that's closest to the robots tool. Then, we
describe the pose of that link frame with
respect to the link frame of the previous
joint. So, this is a relative pose and this
is a concept we should be familiar with now.
This is a relative pose from coordinate frame
J-1 to coordinate frame J.
In the Denavit-Hartenberg notation, the link
transform is represented by a homogeneous
transformation matrix which is typically denoted
by the letter A and it comprises a number
of elementary transformations. It comprises
a rotation around the Z axis. A translation
along the Z axis. A translation along the
X axis and a rotation around the X axis. It's
very concise. It allows us to describe the
relationship between the 2 link coordinate
frames by simply 4 parameters, theta, D, A
and alpha. Let's see how that works in practice.
So here, we have in red link J-1 and the coordinate
frame attached to link J-1. First thing that
we're going to do is to rotate that coordinate
frame around its Z axis by an amount theta
J and we rotate the axis. The next thing we're
going to do is to translate that coordinate
frame along the Z axis by an amount D and
then, we're going to translate it along the
X axis by an amount J and finally, we're going
to rotate it around the X axis by an angle
alpha and now, it looks like this.
So, we have moved from the frame J-1 to the
frame J by applying 4 elementary transformations,
2 translations and 2 rotations. You're probably
asking is how can we do this using only 4
parameters because a pose has got 2 components.
It's got a translational component which we
described by 3 numbers and it has a rotation
which we described by 3 numbers. For example,
roll, pitch, yaw angles or Euler angles. How
do we do it with just 4 numbers? Well, the
reason this works is that the Denavit-Hartenberg
notation requires some constraints on where
we place the coordinate frames. The first
constraint is that the X axis of frame J intersects
the Z axis of frame J-1. The second constraint
is that the X axis of frame J is perpendicular
to the Z axis of frame J-1. Although, there
are only 6 degrees of freedom in a relative
pose. The fact that we've introduced 2 constraints
means that we can describe this using only
4 parameters. There's an interesting and often
confusing consequence of this and that means
that the link frames are not necessarily on
the link itself and this is something that
quite often confuses people when they're starting
off and learning about Denavit-Hartenberg
notation.
The axis of a rotational joint has to be aligned
with the Z axis of that joints coordinate
frame. The Denavit-Hartenberg notation requires
that the axis of joint J is parallel to the
Z axis of a coordinate frame but it's not
the coordinate frame attached to link J. The
axis of joint J is aligned with the Z axis
of the previous coordinate frame, that's coordinate
frame J-1 and again, this is a confusing aspect
for people who is starting out learning about
this notation. For the case of a prismatic
or sliding joint, the motion must be along
the Z axis. So, for rotational joint, rotate
around the Z axis of the previous frame for
a prismatic joint, we translate along the
Z axis of the previous frame.
The relative pose from the frame of 1 link
to the next is described by 4 elementary transformations.
For an n-link robot, we can stack groups of
these elementary transformations and each
group contains 4 parameters which described
the relationship between 1 link frame and
the next. If the robot has got all revolute
joints then, the joint angles correspond to
the theta values shown here. So, these are
the joint variables. They change as the robot
moves. All the other parameters, the D's,
the A's and the alpha's are all constant.
They're a function of the mechanical design
of the particular robot. Let's consider a
robot that has got a prismatic joint. Its
second joint is prismatic. Since the first
joint is revolute, we substitute Q1 in here.
For the second joint which is prismatic, we
substitute Q2 in here. For a joint like this,
theta 2 is a constant just like A2 and alpha
2. They are the function of the mechanical
design of this particular robot.
The great advantage of the Denavit-Hartenberg
notation is that it allows us to very concisely
describe a robot. So, for the 2 link robot,
it can be described simply by a table like this.
We have 1 column for each of the Denavit-Hartenberg
parameters and we have one row for each joint
of the robot. The joint variables Q1 and Q2
lie in the theta column because they are revolute
joints. The D values are all 0. There are no translations along the Z axis because this robot exists
in a plane and the 2 link lengths appear in the A column and the alpha values are all equal to 0.
So, this very compact table completely describes what we call the kinematics of the robot.
The robotics toolbox is very well set-up to deal with Denavit-Hartenberg notation.
I'm going to create a Denavit-Hartenberg matrix
and each row in this matrix represents a single
link. It's just like the table we looked at
a moment ago. Now, I'm going to enter the
numbers corresponding to the columns of that
table; theta, D, A and alpha for the first
joint and theta, D, A and alpha for the second
joint and finish that matrix offset, I have
a simple 2 by 4 matrix which contains a Denavit-Hartenberg
parameters for a 2 joint robot.
While I can create a robot object, I'm going
to put it into the workspace variable R and
I use the toolbox function serial link and
I pass in the Denavit-Hartenberg parameter
matrix and the result is a serial link object
created in my workspace and the serial link
object represents a robot arm. We can see
here that it's displayed the Denavit-Hartenberg
parameters in table form. There are some additional
parameters around the bottom which we will
introduce shortly.
Once I have this object then, I can perform
some simple functions on it I can plot the
robot with the configuration where the joint
angles are perhaps 0.2 radiance and 0.3 radiance
and this is what it looks like and I can also
create a teach pendant.
So, here is the teach pendant, brings up the
sliders that we've seen before allows me to
move the joints of this robot arm.
The robot object also has a forward kinematic
method. So, I can apply that to the robot
object. It's the fkine method and if I pass
in for instance, the joint angles 0.2 and
0.3, it will return for me a homogeneous transformation
representing the pose of the in-defector of that robot.
We can see here the X coordinate and the Y
coordinate and this matrix over here represents
the orientation of the in-defector of this
robot. For a more complex robot like the Puma
560, it can be described by a table like this.
Once again, the table has got 4 columns but
in this case, it's got 6 rows because there
are 6 joints, because this robot is all revolute,
we find all the joint verbals in the theta
column. In the D column and the A column,
we find a number of numbers which correspond
to physical lengths on the Puma robot.
The length of the upper arm, the length of
the lower arm, some horizontal offsets and
so on and the alpha column, we find a number
of rotations which either pi on 2 or negative
pi on 2 and they say something about the orientation
of 1 joints rotational axis and the next joints
rotational axis.
Where MATLAB and robotics toolbox really come
into their own is when we're dealing with
complex robots, those with 6 joints or more.
I can import a model of the classical Puma
560 robot and it's created a verbal in the
workspace called P560 and I can have a look
at that and here, we see a table which contains
the Denavit-Hartenberg parameters that described
that particular robot.
Now, I can plot that robot for a particular
joint angle configuration. Now, I'm going
to use the variable QZ which was defined by
the function in the Puma 560. We can see that
over here in the workspace. It's a vector
with 6 elements all equal to 0 and here, we
see the robot in the configuration where all
its joint angles are equal to 0. Another configuration
that was defined is this one QR which was
referred to the robot's ready pose and this
is with the arm pointing straight up into
the air.
I can also bring up a teach pendant on this
particular robot. Here, we see it. Now, I
have got 6 sliders, 1 for each of its joints.
I can rotate it above the waist. I can move
the shoulder down. I can lift the elbow up.
I'll move the elbow down, move it down a bit
more and I can rotate it around the waist
so we can see what's going on.
We can see the in-defector coordinate frame
there and if I adjust the wrist joint angles,
we can see the orientation of the in-defector
changing. The object has got a forward kinematic
method. So, if I asked for the forward kinematics
for a set of joint angles, perhaps the joint
angles equal 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. I'm just making
up some numbers here. This is the homogeneous
transformation which represents the pose of
the in-defector of this 6 axis Puma 560 robot.
So, to use a very general mathematical notation,
we can say that the pose of an n-joint robot
which I'm going to write as PSI N is a function
and the function is K and K stands for kinematics,
a term that we will define concisely shortly
and it's a function of the joint configuration,
that's the vector of the N joint variables.
They might be angles or they might be links
in the case of a sliding joint. A vector of
joint angles, a vector of link offsets, a
vector of link lengths and a vector of what
are called link twists and a vector of joint
types.
Sigma is a vector that contains elements which
are either R or P and they indicate whether
the joint is revolute or prismatic. In the
case of a revolute joint, we substitute the
corresponding element of theta from the corresponding
element of Q and for prismatic joint, we substitute
the corresponding element of D from the corresponding
element of Q. All the other elements of D,
theta, A and alpha are constant.